Good morning, Concord.
I get the honor this morning of introducing our guest to you.
He is an author.
He is a speaker.
He is the former administrator for the United States Fire Administration, as well as former Atlanta Fire Chief.
But more importantly, he is a husband.
He is a dad.
He is a grandfather and a brother in Christ.
And so if y'all would please help me welcome Kelvin Cochran.
Well, this is the day that the Lord has made
and we will rejoice and be glad in it.
Good morning, Concord Baptist Church.
I bring you greetings from, I think I heard a couple of people say good morning, but good morning, Concord Baptist Church.
It is a pleasure to be here with you this morning.
I bring you greetings from the Elizabeth Baptist Church, your sister church in the Georgia Baptist Mission Board, the Georgia Baptist Convention.
And I greet you on behalf of our
Senior Pastor Dr. Craig L. Oliver Sr.
I want to thank you, Concord Baptist Church, for your love and support as about three years ago Pastor Levi Skipper invited me here to share with you in worship and he wanted me to share my story with you, my story of faith in this journey when I was terminated from employment from the city of Atlanta as fire chief.
Well, your warmth and your compassion and prayers and love
saw me through that difficult season of my life and about a year or so ago God vindicated me.
The policy that was used as the defense that terminated me as the excuse or justification rather for terminating me was ruled unconstitutional and it was settled with the city of Atlanta.
So God was glorified and I want to just say how much I appreciate your support.
and your prayers during that challenging season of my life.
Thank you so much for your support and for your prayers.
And today is the day that we are here to honor first responders, and I believe about three surrounding counties, but can I tell you, when you honor first responders in your local community, it also brings honor to first responders around our state, around our nation, and even around the world.
So can we just one more time give God praise for the first responders
I have a message today for first responders, but I believe it's going to bless all of us as sons and daughters of God.
And the title of the message is Our Calling to Fulfill, Our Calling to Fulfill.
And the scripture text is found in Romans chapter eight, verses 28 through 29.
Romans chapter eight, verses 28 through 29 from the new King James version reads, and we know
that all things work together for good to those who love God, to those who are the called according to his purpose, for whom he did for no, he also did predestined to be conformed to the image of his son, that he might be the firstborn of many brethren.
The new living translation ends it by saying that he might be the firstborn of many brothers and sisters.
Let's pray.
Dear God, our Father, how we praise you and thank you for this day that you have made and our resolve is to rejoice and be glad in it.
We thank you that you've blessed us to be citizens of the United States of America, the land of the free and the home of the brave, where you have raised up the brave and first responders to watch over, to protect, to respond to, to rescue and to bring order out of chaos during natural and man-made disasters.
We thank you for them and we celebrate them on today.
Now, Lord, let the words of my mouth and the meditations of my heart be acceptable in your sight.
I decree the word of God that says the spirit of the Lord speaks through me and your words are in my tongue.
And I'll be careful to give you the praise in Jesus' name, amen.
The three most important questions that
All children of God, even babies, even young kids have as it relates to our walk of faith is, what did God create me to do?
All children of God want to know, what did God create me to do?
Second question is, what did God create me to be?
And the third question that's innately planted in all the children of God is, how do I fulfill God's plan for my life?
The answers to those three questions are found in the text, Romans 8, 28 through 29.
As it relates to the question of what did God create me to do, the word called or calling helps to answer that question.
As it relates to what did God create me to be, the word purpose helps to answer that question.
And fulfilling God's plan for my life is predestination
And so destiny helps to answer that question.
In many instances, brothers and sisters, purpose is used synonymously with destiny and purpose is used synonymously with calling.
And in some cases, because it's used synonymously, it causes some confusion.
God made us with a purpose on purpose and for a purpose.
For a purpose is related to calling.
On purpose is related to intentionally.
God did it intentionally.
It was not random and accidentally.
And with a purpose is related to destiny with a plan.
God has a plan and completing that plan is destiny.
For a scriptural point of reference and case in point, I love Acts chapter 13 verse 36.
In the good news translation, it helps to clarify.
It says, and David,
fulfilled all the purposes of God in his life, then he died.
What that scripture is saying, all the purposes means, and David fulfilled his calling, David fulfilled his purpose, and David fulfilled his destiny, and then he died.
And if you think about that for just a moment as a child of God,
That is the life that all of us are pursuing.
We want to fulfill all the purposes of God in our life, then die.
I know the dying part does not sound too exciting, but really the reality of all of us is we want to live as long as God has planned for us to live and not live another day after God planned for us to live.
Can I tell you the worst day of your life
will be to wake up the day after God intended for you to die and then find out that you're still alive.
That will be the worst day of your life.
That'll catch on when you're having dinner later on this afternoon.
So there are three points that I want to bring out in the message.
The significance of calling, the significance of purpose, and the significance of destiny, specifically in the context of first responders, but I'll break off of that
context just to kind of bring the rest of you in along the way.
To fulfill our calling, here's the big idea behind the first point.
To fulfill our calling, we must be faithful to God's plan and our purpose.
Calling brothers and sisters is what God created us to do.
A career in EMS is a calling.
A career in law enforcement is a calling.
And a career in fire and rescue services is a calling.
And to deviate from the first responder context, I want to just put it into a greater context.
If you're a son or daughter of God and you're a teacher, it's a calling.
If you're a doctor and you're a son of God, it's a calling.
If you're a nurse and you're a son or daughter of God, it's a calling.
All of our careers that are of God are callings on our lives.
Some of us became aware of our calling when we were just kids.
Some of us realized our calling when we were going through the basic training as a paramedic or as an EMT or as a law enforcement officer.
And some of us realized our calling when we completed the training and we responded to a call and during the course of using our gifts and skills during that call, and we saw how it made a difference.
It dawned on us, this is exactly what God created me to do because what God created us to do
is a calling.
My experience is I received my calling when I was a five-year-old boy growing up in Shreveport, Louisiana, living in a raggedy shotgun house in a back alley.
One Sunday after church, Miss Maddie's house across the alley from us, her house caught on fire.
When the Shreveport firefighters came and we were standing on the front porch of our little shotgun house, my mom, my three big brothers and my two little sisters, I looked at them and said, I want to be a fireman when I grow up.
I was five.
And it never left me, it just grew and grew and grew over the years.
Because our calling is from God, brothers and sisters, from God means divine.
Anything that originates in God is known as divine.
A calling is an assignment.
So we should look at our callings, our careers as divine assignments.
Can I get you to say that with me?
Divine assignments.
And because a calling is a divine assignment, it came from God.
We are supposed to be able to do things that others who are not called are not able to do.
There should be a distinction between first responders who are the called and first responders who are not the called.
And I cannot tell you that all first responders are not called to be first responders.
But those who are the called that are first responders,
are supposed to be able to do things that first responders who are not called are not supposed to be able to do.
Philippians 2 13 backs it up.
It says it is God at work in you both to will and to do according to his good pleasure.
When we're working as first responders, it's not because we are all that and we're so smart and we're so skilled.
The reason why we're as good as we are is because it is God.
at work in us to will and to do according to his good pleasure.
There's another scripture in Ephesians 3 and 19.
We are supposed to do things that non-call first responders are not able to do because that scripture says that we are filled with the fullness of God.
It goes on to say unto him who is able to do exceeding abundantly above all we may ask or think according to the power that works
in us.
The power that works in us as paramedics, the power that works in us as police officers, the power that works in us as firefighter is the power of God, the Holy Spirit.
And because the Holy Spirit is on the inside of us, we are supposed to be distinct from first responders who do not have the Holy Spirit on the inside of them.
Now, paramedics, that doesn't mean stop wearing your body substance isolation protective equipment.
Police officers, that doesn't mean stop wearing your bulletproof vest.
And firefighters, that doesn't mean stop wearing your personal protective gear.
Amen, brothers and sisters.
To be successful in our calling, we must be faithful to God, recognizing our career is a divine assignment from God.
Calling is not what we were created to do for God and for His glory.
Calling is not what you're doing for God.
Calling is what God is doing through you.
It's not what we're doing for God.
It's what God is doing through us as first responders.
It's being a teacher.
Teaching is not what you're doing for God as a child of God.
Teaching is what God is doing through you as a teacher for the glory of God.
And it applies to all of our professions as children of God.
for first responders, God called us because he foreknew there would be heart attacks.
He foreknew there would be car wrecks.
He foreknew that mothers would have babies before they get to the hospital and they needed some help from emergency medical technicians.
God foreknew that there would be crimes and there would be persons that are driving above the speed limit that needed to be stopped and there would be robbers and burglars and so he created
law enforcement officers.
God knew that there would be fires and there would be rescues and there would be situations that, uh, getting cats out of trees.
And so he created firefighters to do those things.
He foreknew that we would be needed.
And so he chose us to do those things because if he was here, he would have to do those things.
And since he is spirit and we are flesh, he hand selected
sons and daughters of God, to be paramedics, to be police officers, and to be firefighters, to be the deliverer of promises that he made to protect, to rescue, to save, to bring back to life again, and to bring order out of chaos.
God's plan, however, brothers and sisters, not only concerned what he created us to do, God's plan also included what he created us to be
our purpose.
So the second point is the significance of purpose.
Here's the big idea behind the significance of purpose.
To fulfill our calling, we must be faithful to our purpose in family and all family relationships.
Purpose, brothers and sisters in Christ, is what God created us to be.
It says in the text, to be conformed
to the image of his son, that he might be the firstborn among many brothers and sisters.
God created us because God wanted a family.
And in the family of God, there are only sons and daughters.
It's explained like that in the Bible in the Old Testament and in this text in the New Testament.
Remember when you look at Genesis chapter five it talks about the lineage from Abraham and I mean Adam and it goes down to Seth and then it names the next oldest son and then it names the next oldest son and from generation to generation.
The Bible is clear that when it names the oldest son then it says in every generation it also says and he had many sons
and daughters, and then it would name the next generation, the oldest boy, and then it would say, and he had many sons and daughters, and then it would name the next oldest boy and the next generation, and he had many sons and daughters.
There are only two genders in the family of God, sons and daughters, and not 71, as is the new standard for gender types.
that we have in our culture today.
Not saying that to be mean brothers and sisters, but if we believe that the Bible is the authoritative, infallible, inerrant Word of God, then the truth is, sons and daughters of God fall in two categories, males and females.
In God's family, there's only sons and daughters, and God has no grandchildren.
All of us are His sons and daughters.
So what does that mean as it relates to purpose?
I hear guys talking all the time, brother Kelvin, I'm trying to, I'm still trying to find my purpose.
Even ladies, I hear ladies say I'm still trying to find my purpose.
God, our purpose brothers and sisters is not like a game of hide and seek where you're asking God, what's my purpose?
And then he's just holding back from giving you the answer.
It's one of those far as for the trees kinds of things as it relates to what our purpose is.
So what's my point?
My point is, since God's family only has sons and daughters, when God predestined you, when you were born male, then that is the foundation of your purpose.
Your purpose as a male, first and foremost when you were born, is to be a faithful son to your mama and daddy.
If you got brothers and sisters, your purpose expands to be a faithful brother to your brothers and sisters.
When you get married, brother, your purpose expands is to be a faithful husband to your wife.
When you have children, your purpose expands, and that's to be a faithful father to your sons and your daughters, your children.
If your brothers and sisters have children, you ought to be a faithful uncle to your nieces and nephews.
If your mom and daddy has brothers and sisters, you ought to be a faithful nephew to your uncle and your aunties.
And when your children have children, your purpose is to be a faithful papa to your grandkids.
That's what purpose is all about, to be conformed
to the image of his son and family relationships.
Sisters, it's your turn.
When you were born female, your purpose is to be a faithful daughter to your mother and father.
If you've got brothers and sisters, your purpose in God is to be a faithful sister to your brothers and sisters.
When you get married, your purpose expands to be a faithful wife to your husband.
When you have children, to be a faithful mom to your sons and daughters.
If your brothers and sisters have children, to be a faithful auntie,
to your nieces and nephews when your children have children to be a faithful grandmother, Nana, Z mama, whatever you call it, to your grandkids.
Our purpose is found in being faithful in family because we prove that we are faithful to God by being faithful in family.
Here's a scriptural reference to it.
Ephesians 6 verse one through three says,
Children obey your parents in the Lord for this is right.
Honor your father and mother, which is the first commandment with promise that it may go well with you and you may live long on the earth.
Listen, it's a principle that is in the word of God for parents being honored by their children to honor God.
And it applies to all other family relationships.
The scripture didn't go through every scenario like I just did, but it starts with mom and dad, but it actually cascades down to every family relationships.
And it says, if you do that, you honor God, and if you do that, you will be successful in your calling.
It will go well with you.
There's also a promise in there that says, if you honor your family relationships, not only will it go well with you and your calling, you will fulfill your destiny.
You will live a long life.
Isn't that something that's favored on your calling if you honor family and you have a promise of a long life, you will retire and enjoy your retirement if you honor your family relationships.
Here's the part that really blew my mind when I studied the Bible on purpose and calling.
Those of us who are not faithful in our family relationships will not be successful in our calling.
You may be a person
who says, I know what my calling is, but I'm just not thriving in it.
I would say that nine times out of 10 times, if you know what your calling is and you're not thriving in your calling, go back through the scenarios that I gave in your family relationships.
And if there is a broken relationship in your family that God has pricked your heart to reconcile that relationship, but you haven't responded to the obedience of God's conviction
to restore that relationship and reconcile it, you know it's been broken for years.
I'm talking a family member and you are a child of God, but you say you love God, but you don't love your family member enough to initiate reconciliation.
There is no way that God's favor can be on your career and you are dishonoring your relationship with family because honoring relationships in family shows that we honor God.
Does that make sense, brothers and sisters?
So faithfulness and family, and I got a biblical reference to you.
Samson, one of my heroes in the faith.
Most guys, when we look at Samson, he's one of our heroes in the faith.
He's one of the guys listed in Hebrews chapter 11.
But Samson was a guy who did not fulfill his whole potential.
He did not honor his mother and his father.
He was always getting in trouble.
And he was always getting in trouble because he didn't obey.
They said, listen, we want you to marry
Israelite girl, leave them Philistine girls alone.
And he just wouldn't leave those Philistine girls alone.
He got so crazy about one of them, she tried to kill him three times and he wouldn't break up with her.
Now that's crazy.
But he was disobedient to his parents and he had the gifts of God on his life but he died before he was supposed to die.
He didn't do everything he was supposed to do but God honored him
by giving him enough strength at the end to take down that temple and his faithfulness in that moment caused him to end up in Hebrews chapter 11.
You will not fulfill your calling if you're not faithful in family relationships.
That is the point.
If you have not discovered your calling, it is more than likely you have a history of unreconciled, broken and unfaithful relationships with your family.
If you're not serving to your potential,
More than likely it is due to unrecognized broken and unfaithful relationships in your family.
My testimony fits that.
In my early, late twenties and early thirties, I was striving in my calling.
I was a captain on the street part fire department, very skilled and gifted in what I was doing.
And my career calling went to my head.
I thought it was all me and not God at work in me.
And so I became unfaithful in my family, unfaithful with my wife and unfaithful
with my children, disobedient to my parents, and my career came to a screeching halt.
I couldn't do anything right.
But when the Holy Spirit convicted me and I got my relationships right with my wife and with my children and apologized to my mother and started serving God and honoring God through our family relationships, my career took off and exceeded all of my expectations as a five-year-old boy that had a dream
to be a firefighter when I grew up.
I became the fire chief in Shreveport and became the fire chief in Atlanta and appointed me and allowed me to be the head of the United States Fire Administration, the highest position in the country because if I had not gotten family right, I would not have gotten my career calling right.
Does that make sense, brothers and sisters?
Jesus is a good example that if you are unfaithful to your purpose and family, you will miss your calling.
If Jesus had not fulfilled his purpose as a son, he would have missed his calling as a savior.
It was his obedience to Mary as a son at the wedding at Cana that launched him into his calling.
He told his mother when she said, boy, you got to turn these pots of water into wine.
He told his mama emphatically, woman, it is not my time.
And when Mary insisted, boy, you better turn these pots of water into wine.
He obeyed his mama and the scripture says that launched him into his calling.
Had he been disobedient, he would have missed his calling.
There are younger adults in this room today.
There are children who says, I know what I want to be when I grow up that are disobedient to their parents.
And let me tell you, no matter how passionate you are about what you want to be when you grow up,
about the career that you have.
If you are disobedient, not only to your parents, but in family relationships, you will miss your calling.
Because God never blesses a calling on a person's life, a divine assignment, unless they have proven that they can be faithful in family relationship.
Why?
Because family culture teaches stewardship, obedience, respectful authority in your parents, respectful peers with your brothers and sisters,
Faithfulness and family instills community, instills citizenship, instills patriotism, all of which are necessary for a successful career.
Every person in the Bible that God used to give a divine assignment was faithful in their family.
He chose Noah to build a boat because he was the only man on earth faithful to his family at the time.
He chose Abraham to build a great nation because he was the only man on earth at the time that was faithful to his family.
He chose Moses because Moses learned to become faithful to his family the 40 years that he was in the wilderness after the 40 years that he was in Egypt.
And after he proved he could be faithful to his wife, his father-in-law and his two boys, God said, I got an assignment for you.
Go and get my people out of Egypt.
Ruth would not have a book in the Bible if she had not been faithful to Naomi.
Esther would not have saved her people from genocide if she had not been faithful to Mordecai.
Every single time God gives a person a divine assignment, it's because they have proven that they could be faithful in their family.
Can I give you the last one, significance of destiny?
Can we go to that one now?
The big idea behind the significance of destiny
is to fulfill our calling, we must be faithful to God's plan, our destiny.
The text explains God planned our calling and purpose before the foundation of the world, which means before Genesis chapter one, verse one was written, God had a plan for our lives.
Predestination means he planned every day of our lives before our birthday and from beginning to end.
David put it this way in Psalm 139 and 16.
All the days of my life were written in your book before one of them came to be fulfilling God's plan is known as destiny.
Destiny is what will happen in the life of a son or a daughter of God in spite of any effort to prevent it.
As long as Jesus is your savior and Lord, no matter what happens in your life,
The plan that God has for your life will be fulfilled.
God not only planned what he wanted us to do and what he wanted us to be, he also planned for our success in it and our tenure, how long we would do it.
All things work together for good to those who love God.
Romans 8, 28A.
Listen, even the bad things work together for good to those who love God.
Growing up in poverty is a bad thing.
but it worked together for my good.
Being unfaithful to my family relationship was a bad thing but it brought me to my knees and it brought me back to God and it worked together for my good.
Being discriminated in the fire department because I was an African American is a bad thing but it worked together for my good.
Being broke is a bad thing
But it worked together for my good.
I started tithing.
Listen, all the bad things that we go through, good and bad things, if you're a child of God, all things work together for good to them that love God.
Everything that God planned for your life is gonna happen.
Nothing can stop God's plan for your life.
Not injustice, not incarceration, not illness, or injuries, or addictions, or divorce, bankruptcy, suspensions, the motions, terminations, and transgressions.
Nothing can stop God's plan.
for your life if you are a child of God, if Jesus is your savior and if Jesus is your Lord.
In the same chapter, verse 35 through 39, backs up what I just said.
Who can separate us from the love of Christ?
Shall trouble or hardship or persecution or famine or neckiness or danger or sword?
As it is written, listen first responders, this applies specifically to us, for your sake, we face death all day long.
We are counted as sheep to be slaughtered.
No, in all these things, we are more than conquerors through Him who loved us, for I am convinced that neither death nor life, neither angels nor demons, neither the present nor the future, nor any powers, neither height nor death, nor anything else in all creation will be able to separate us from the love of God that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Nothing can stop God's plan from happening in our life.
All things work together for good has an exclusive designation for a distinct and exclusive group of people.
It is specific and exclusive to those who love God, those who are the called according to his purpose.
If you are in this group, your destiny cannot be stopped.
You will fulfill your calling.
You will do things exceeding abundantly above all you can ask for think in your purpose.
You will leave a legacy of faith and righteousness for the next generation in your family and your profession.
If you change your purpose, however, you will miss your calling.
If you miss your calling, you will not fulfill your destiny.
If you don't fulfill your destiny, you will not leave a legacy of faith and righteousness for your children and your grandchildren, the next generation of your family.
God wants to use all of us in our callings to serve in such a manner that we set a standard for everyone else who will serve in our position after we have promoted or retired.
So if you're a first level ranking paramedic, God wants to use you as that entry level paramedic to serve in such a way when you become a paramedic supervisor, your service at that entry level
will be the standard for, they want to find everybody else they had to fulfill that position.
You're the model for every other entry level paramedic after that point.
If you're a lieutenant, God wants you to serve as a lieutenant in the fire department or in the law enforcement to where once you get promoted to a captain, you set a standard for lieutenants that every lieutenant after that time will be judged by your performance because you are called of God because
he's using you to do great things.
If you're not in this group of those who are the called according to his purpose, I can tell you how to get in and you can get in today.
And there's one word that gets you in Jesus, the son of God, who became the son of man so that sons and daughters of God, sons and daughters of men can become sons and daughters of God.
Jesus fulfilled
All the purposes of God in his life.
Jesus's purpose was son.
Jesus's calling was savior.
And Jesus's destiny was king of kings.
When Jesus said it is finished, he was saying, I have fulfilled all the purposes of God in my life.
Those who are the called according to his purpose have the assurance that one day they too will be able to say it is finished.
Because Jesus is my Savior and because Jesus is my Lord, that scripture that we said about David earlier, it applies to me.
At my funeral, when I die, I want one of my kids, I want my eulogy to be done by one of my kids.
And I want it to be very brief.
I've already told them this.
All I want them to say is Kelvin,
fulfilled all the purposes of God in his life, then he died.
For children of God, that's what we live for, that's what we strive for.
For children of God who are first responders, that's what you should live for, that's what you should strive for.
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, how we praise you and thank you that every day of our lives we're written in your book,
Before one of them came to be, you have a plan for our life.
Thank you that before the foundation of the earth, you chose our profession.
You have a calling on our life.
And according to the doctrine of predestination, you decided whether we were going to be a son or whether we were going to be a daughter.
You had a purpose for our life.
I pray to your God that by the power of your Holy Spirit, you have convicted us to fulfill our purpose, our calling and our destiny.
that all of your children will be able to say that they have fulfilled the purposes of God in their life.
And if there's someone here today who does not know Jesus Christ as Savior and Lord, that will change today.
And they will know what it's like to fulfill all the purposes of God in their life.
In Jesus' name, amen.
Amen.
Would y'all help me thank Kelvin today?
Thank you, brother.
You know, as he was talking about purpose, one of the things that I kept thinking about was that each and every single person, as he was saying, has been created for a purpose.
That our purpose is to enjoy Christ and to make Him known.
And so you were specifically designed and created and thought of and given life, and that life that you were given was the intent to glorify God and make Him known and enjoy Him forever.
where the Bible teaches that even though that's what we were created for, that we have all in our own selfishness, in our own pride, have said, no, I'm gonna try it my way, and we've all sinned and fallen short of the glory of God.
And so some of the things that Kelvin was talking about, the brokenness that he experienced in his life is because he stepped out of the purpose that God had intended for his life, and when he did that, he experienced brokenness.
He first experienced brokenness in his relationship with Christ because sin separates us from God.
But then really God has created a specific way for all of us to live in every area of life.
So first we depart the family relationship that God intended us for to be sons and daughters of His.
And so it leads to brokenness in that area.
But then when we depart, God's design for our life, it leads to brokenness in so many other areas of life.
God has a specific design for family and for marriage and for work and for how we live each and every day.
When we depart that design, we end up in brokenness.
But the good news is that Jesus Christ came in the midst of our brokenness.
And he lived a perfect life and then on the cross he took our sin and our shame and our brokenness and died the death that we deserved.
And then three days later rose up out of the ground to prove that he had the power over sin and death.
And the Bible teaches that at the name of Jesus, every knee shall bow on heaven and earth and tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord.
And so there will come a day when all people will see and will notice and will
respond to the King, but today you have an opportunity to respond to the Savior, to turn from your sin and to follow Him, to trust Him.
And so we want to give you an opportunity to do that.
And so we're going to be down front here.
We're going to have a song of response.
So if you're here today and you know that you have not turned and you have not accepted the free gift of Jesus Christ and turned from your sin and followed Him, we would love to talk to you about that and what that looks like.
Or if you've got something else that you would like to pray for.
And then also if you're a first responder in the room today, we're going to be down front.
We'd love to pray over you.
And just to say thank you.
And so if you're here today and would like to do that, we'll be down front now during this time.
So I wanna pray.
And then after I pray, let's stand together and sing.
Father, thank you for this opportunity we get.
Father, help our hearts to be humble and submissive to what you want to do.
And then we pray.
Amen.
If y'all would stand with us and sing.
Amen, church, let's sing.